# Źródła do nauki programowania w języku C
To repozytorum zawiera listę książek i innych zasobów o programowaniu w języku C które są w mojej opinii nalepsze do nauki tego języka. Jest wiele źródeł, lecz nie każde jest poprawne. W ten sposób, początkujący popełniają zbyt dużo często powtarzających się błędów w swoim kodzie. Zalecałbym Ci czytanie książek w takiej kolejności jak ta którą podałem.
#### Z jakich miejsc się **nie** uczyć:
 - [TutorialsPoint](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/cprogramming/index.htm). TutorialsPoint to dobra strona do np. spojrzenia jak działa dana funkcja. Z tej strony nie nauczysz się C we właściwy sposób.
 - [Udemy](https://www.udemy.com/c-programming-for-beginners/). Udemy nie jest dobrym miejscem do nauki C. Kursy kosztują zdecydowanie zbyt dużo (440 PLN w momencie pisania). **Niektóre kursy zalecają użycie starego Borland C++ Buildera** - Nauka starych technologii to niezbyt dobry start w programowaniu.
 - [SoloLearn](https://www.sololearn.com/). SoloLearn nie oferuje żadnego kursu z jakiego możemy się nauczyć C. Ta strona internetowa uczy **jak** coś zrobić, podczas gdy twoje doświadczenie uczy jak coś **zrobić**.
 - [Youtube](https://youtube.com/). Nauka z niezbyt-popularnych kanałów na YouTube to nie jest dobry pomysł. Potrzebujesz nawuczyć się z dobrego miejsca. Są popularne kanały, takie jak [ten](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCzn6vAfspIcagLax1fck_jw). Ten kanał jest idealny by nauczyć się jak **nie** programować.
#### Z jakich miejsc można się uczyć:
 - [K&R book](http://cs.indstate.edu/~cbasavaraj/cs559/the_c_programming_language_2.pdf) bardzo często mówi się że jest to biblia C. Jest wiele standardów C, ale K&R C ma sławę tego który jest najbardziej popularny - każdy szanujący się kompilator musi to wspierać. Najczęściej używany standard to C89, ale C99 i C11 są nowsze. W ten sposób, książka K&R jest cały czas na czasie. Została napisana przez twórców C, którzy koniec końców nie mogli się mylić.
   * Zalety:
     * Ta książka **była napisana przez Dennisa Ritchie**, który **był jednym z najważniejszych ludzi tworzących C** i UNIX.
     * Ta książka jest nazywana również "K&R", patrząc po imionach autorów.
     * Cytowana w wielu innych książkach. Jest bardzo dobrze znana przez studentów CS.
     * Zadania na końcu rozdziałów umożliwiają naukę w lepszy sposób i upewniają czytelnika czy powinien powtórzyć materiał, czy może iść dalej. Wykonywanie zadań z książki to świetny sposób żeby dobrze poznać materiał.
   * Wady:
     * Styl K&R działa na starych komputerach z systemem UNIX w trybie tekstowym (chodzi o komputery typu mainframe) programy przeważnie kończą się wykonując prostezadanie i nie zwalniają po sobie pamięci; where input is only from trusted experts; and most functions are only called internally to the program. The environment is very different today. This style will get your server pwned by hackers, or crash it due to a memory leak. You will have to learn C again to use C correctly in the real world **today**.
     * Some commands and practices are out of date, so errata and googling is needed while going through the book.
     * Assumes familiarity not only with programming concepts but some C language specifics - not so simple for beginners.
 * [C Programming: Modern approach, 2nd Edition](https://www.amazon.com/C-Programming-Modern-Approach-2nd/dp/0393979504)
   * Pros:
     * The book really challenges you to think like a programmer by constantly asking questions that force you to solve problems, rather than telling you how to solve the problem and only asking you to write the syntax. This way helps beginner programmers to get into programming.
     * The author breaks things down into small pieces and uses examples to explain everything in a very clear way.
     * Doesn't have exercise answers (can be counted like con)
 * [Learn C the hard way](https://learncodethehardway.org/c/). Just looking at the title, it may not be greatest book for newcomer to learn.
   * Pros
     * It's not just about C. It will teach to become an over-all better programmer and give a better understanding of computer science. You are going to learn about things like testing, debugging, and sorting algorithms.
     * Includes 52 practical project ideas that include everything from pointers to stacks and queues.
   * Con: States in the preface that it is not for first-time programmers. Better check something other, if you are new to C.
 * [C Programming Absolute Beginner's Guide (3rd Edition)](https://www.amazon.com/Programming-Absolute-Beginners-Guide-3rd/dp/0789751984). It's suggested to check out this book if others are too hard for you.
   * Pro: There are 32 chapters in the book, which is 352 pages long. The short chapters make it extremely easy to use this book as a reference, and breaks everything down into small pieces that are easy to digest.
   * Con: This book, as the title suggests, is really aimed at people with no prior programming experience.
Fundamentals are gone through in detail, this would be quite a slow review for someone with experience in another language.
 * (NASA C style book)[http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/dts/pm/Papers/nasa-c-style.pdf]. This book is pretty nice place to learn proper way how to program in C to write readable code.

Please note that this list as stated on beginning, is based primarily on my opinion. If you disagree with some facts, please open issue / submit a pull request that contents are satisfying you. I am working on a C book that after review will probably get on this list.
Books that I am not sure about quality:
 * [Programming in C (4th Edition) (Developer's Library)](https://www.amazon.com/Programming-C-4th-Developers-Library/dp/0321776410/ref=pd_bxgy_14_img_2?_encoding=UTF8&pd_rd_i=0321776410&pd_rd_r=F4EZTNWZYDBJA50CBXYE&pd_rd_w=ZihCY&pd_rd_wg=4ehaO&psc=1&refRID=F4EZTNWZYDBJA50CBXYE)
 
 # Why to learn C?

There are a lot of programmers that think C is not language worth learning. Let's review this. C was originally developed for the UNIX operating system by Dennis Ritchie. It's quite simple, is not tied to any particular hardware or operating system. **If some platform has C compiler, it's worth attention**. C is really general purpose language, so this way **it's so common**. This makes **it easier to write programs that will run without any changes on practically all machines that have POSIX compiliant API's**. The C language is a middle-level language as it combines the elements of high-level languages (structures, unions, enums, functions, conditionals) with the functionalism of assembly language. **It's possible to simulate OOP in C and write an operating system. C allows the manipulation of nearly everything** giving the programmer more control over exactly how the program will behave and more direct access to the mechanics of the underlying hardware, **while keeping application fully portable**. C is often quoted as cross-platform assembly. **C is still one of the most popular programming languages out there [at the time of writing it was 2nd language overall](https://www.tiobe.com/tiobe-index/). Overall, C was first most common language 1988-2013! Popularity is still growing. In the year of writing, C had the highest rise in ratings in a year.** C is everywhere. Your keyboard is very propably powered by C, same as your fridge or even modem. **Microsoft Windows was developed in C and has nearly 90% market share. Same as Linux, MacOS, iOS, Android and Windows Phone.** I hope pepole that hate C are having good time using things that C powers. The world’s most popular databases, including **Oracle Database, MySQL, MS SQL Server, and PostgreSQL are developed in C**. 3D movies are created with applications that are generally written in C and C++. The alarm clock that wakes you up is likely programmed in C. Then you use your microwave or coffee maker to make your breakfast. They are also embedded systems and therefore are probably programmed in C. You turn on your TV or radio while you eat your breakfast. Those are also embedded systems, powered by C. When you open your garage door with the remote control you are also using an embedded system that is most likely programmed in C. You get to the store, park your car and go to a vending machine to get a soda. What language did they use to program this vending machine? Probably C. Then you buy something at the store. The cash register is also programmed in C. And when you pay with your credit card? The credit card reader is, again, likely programmed in C. **There are many programming languages, today, that allow developers to be more productive than with C for different kinds of projects. There are higher level languages that provide much larger built-in libraries that simplify working with JSON, XML, UI, web pages, client requests, database connections, media manipulation, and so on. But despite that, there are plenty of reasons to believe that C programming will remain active for a long time.** In programming languages one size does not fit all. Here are some reasons that C is unbeatable, and almost mandatory, for certain applications. **Arbitrary memory address access and pointer arithmetic is an important feature that makes C a perfect fit for system programming (operating systems and embedded systems).** **A common language feature that system programming cannot rely on is garbage collection, or even just dynamic allocation for some embedded systems. Embedded applications are very limited in time and memory resources. They are often used for real-time systems, where a non-deterministic call to the garbage collector cannot be afforded. And if dynamic allocation cannot be used because of the lack of memory, it is very important to have other mechanisms of memory management, like placing data in custom addresses, as C pointers allow.** Languages that depend heavily on dynamic allocation and garbage collection wouldn’t be a fit for resource-limited systems. **C has a very small runtime. And the memory footprint for its code is smaller than for most other languages.** When compared to C++, for example, a C-generated binary that goes to an embedded device is about half the size of a binary generated by similar C++ code. One of the main causes for that is exceptions support. Exceptions are a great tool added by C++ over C, and, if not triggered and smartly implemented, they have practically no execution time overhead (but at the cost of increasing the code size). **C is a lingua franca for developers. Many implementations of new algorithms in books or on the internet are first (or only) made available in C by their authors.** This gives the maximum possible portability for the implementation. I’ve seen programmers struggling on the internet to rewrite a C algorithm to other programming languages because he or she didn’t know very basic concepts of C.

### The Illuminati doesn't run the world. C programmers do.
